JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Good evening.
I Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
As the race for the White House
moves toward
the general election, we talk
with Bernie
Sanders about his ongoing battle
with Hillary
Clinton.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (I-VT),
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE: If we do very, very
well, and get
65 percent of the remaining
votes, we will
actually have a majority of
delegates, as
I understand it.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: It's Friday. Mark
Shields and David
Brooks on that Democratic race,
and on Donald
Trump as the presumptive
Republican nominee.
Plus, an apocalyptic scene in
Canada's Fort
McMurray. Fires continue to
rage, forcing
some 80,000 from their homes.
Also ahead: pianist Rob Kapilow
returns to
celebrate Johannes Brahms's
birthday by breaking
down of one of the composer's
most popular
pieces.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
ROB KAPILOW, PIANIST: According
to all contemporary
accounts, he was sarcastic,
prickly, abrupt,
utterly self- guarded, almost
impossible to
get to know. And the same thing
is actually
true of this piece.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: All that and more, on
tonight's
PBS "NewsHour".
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Donald Trump faced
more major defections
today, as he tries to line up
Republicans
behind his bid for the White
House. And President
Obama weighed in for the first
time on Trump's
rise to the top of the GOP.
John Yang begins our coverage.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
BARACK OBAMA, PRESIDENT OF THE
UNITED STATES:
This is not entertainment. This
is not a reality
show.
JOHN YANG, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT: Today,
President Obama urged voters to
focus more
on Donald Trump's record and
less on what
he called the spectacle and the
circus.
OBAMA: This is a contest for the
presidency
of the United States, and what
that means
is that every candidate, every
nominee, needs
to be subject to exacting
standards and genuine
scrutiny. It means that you got
to make sure
that their budgets add up.
YANG: The president said
Republicans will
have to decide for themselves if
they feel
comfortable with Trump as their
nominee. And
Senator Lindsey Graham of South
Carolina tweeted
that he is not.
Just yesterday, House Speaker
Paul Ryan said
he's not ready to endorse Trump
either.
DONALD TRUMP (R), PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE:
I was really surprised by it.
It's not a good
thing. It's something the party
should get
solved quickly.
YANG: Ryan and other Hill
Republican leaders
are to meet Trump next Thursday.
And Republican
Party Chairman Reince Priebus
told "Politico"
today, he expects the party to
come around.
At a rally in Charleston, West
Virginia, last
night, Trump pledged to restore
the coal industry
and received the endorsement of
the West Virginia
Coal Association, an industry
group.
West Virginians vote next week,
and polls
show Bernie Sanders leading
Hillary Clinton.
She has a nearly insurmountable
lead in delegates,
but in Charleston, voter John
Baker told us
why he's backing the Vermont
senator anyway.
JOHN BAKER, VOTER: And I liked
his emphasis
on things like healthcare and
approaching
drug addictions from a
healthcare perspective,
and things like college
tuitions.
YANG: So you feel perhaps by
voting for Senator
Sanders you're influencing
Secretary Clinton?
BAKER: I would hope so, making a
statement.
YANG: Clinton supporter Bernie
Deem (ph) says
she isn't buying the Sanders
message.
BERNIE DEEM, CLINTON SUPPORTER:
I believe
that she has the ability to see
the needs
of every American. And I think
she has insight
into -- no matter what
generation you are
in, no matter any of the things
that people
-- other people pull us apart, I
think she
realizes that basically we all
have the same
needs. And that she'll find ways
for those
needs to be met.
YANG: It's a divide that been
seen all
through this primary season and
likely will
continue. Sanders insists he'll
campaign all
the way to this summer's
convention.
For the PBS "NewsHour", I John
Yang in
Charleston, West Virginia.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Later in the day,
Trump dismissed
Senator Lindsey Graham's
opposition, saying
Graham ran a, quote, "hapless"
campaign and
has zero credibility.
And, in Omaha, Nebraska, Trump
took on another
former rival -- Jeb Bush, who
said today that
he will not support Trump,
either.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
TRUMP: I won -- I will not
criticize my
competition anymore. Although I
could -- when
somebody says bad about me, even
as recently
as yesterday, I allowed to hit
them, right?
But I won't talk about Jeb Bush.
I will not
say -- I will not say he's low
energy. I will
not say it! I will not say it!
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: Others lining up
against Trump include
Mitt Romney, the party's 2012
presidential
nominee. But former Vice
President Dick Cheney
said he will be in the Trump
camp.
We'll explore all of this, and
have an interview
with Democratic hopeful Bernie
Sanders, later
in the program.
In the day's other news, the
latest jobs numbers
are out, and they show U.S.
employers reined
in their hiring last month. The
labor department
reports 160,000 jobs were added
in April -- far
short of the 215,000 that many
economists
expected. The unemployment rate
remained at
5 percent, about where it's been
since last
fall.
At his mini-news conference
today, President
Obama said a new tax rule will
boost the economy
by curbing offshore tax evasion.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
OBAMA: They will allow us to
continue to do
a better job of tracking
financial flows and
making sure that people are
paying the taxes
that they owe, rather than using
shell corporations
and offshore accounts to avoid
doing the things
that ordinary Americans are
doing every day,
and that's making sure they're
paying their
fair share.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: The president also
called for a
new focus on badly needed public
works projects,
like roads and water pipes, and
for raising
the federal minimum wage.
Wall Street moved modestly
higher on the jobs
news. The Dow Jones Industrial
Average gained
nearly 80 points to close at
17,740. The NASDAQ
rose 19 points, and the S&P 500
added six.
For the week, all three indexes
ended down
by a fraction of a percent.
The city of London is set
tonight to elect
its first Muslim mayor. Votes
counted so far
in Thursday's election show
Labour Party candidate
Sadiq Khan is on track to win
the race. Khan's
conservative opponent accused
him of supporting
Islamist radicals. But he
rejected the charge
and said he will, quote, "take
the fight to
the extremists."
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
REPORTER: They cheer for a
leader who today
hailed an H-bomb test as his
greatest achievement
in office. Kim Jong-un opening
the first --
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: Apologies about that.
North Korea's ruling Workers
Party convened
a grand gathering today for the
first time
in decades. The country's young
dictator,
Kim Jong-un, used it to tout a
nuclear program
condemned by most of the world.
Debi Edward of Independent
Television News
reports from Pyongyang.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
DEBI EDWARD, ITN: They cheer for
a leader
who today hailed an h-bomb test
as his greatest
achievement in office. Kim
Jong-un opening
the first Workers Party Congress
in 36 years,
with a speech celebrating the
unprecedented
results of his nuclear weapons
program.
KIM JONG-UN, NORTH KOREA
DICTATOR (through
translator): The party congress
will be a
historic opportunity for
consolidating and
developing a glorious party, as
well as completing
the great achievement of
socialism.
EDWARD: This 33-year-old was
clearly seeking
to send a strong message to the
world leaders
who have condemned his actions.
But we, together with over 100
foreign journalists
invited here to report on the
event, were
not allowed in.
The Congress is taking place in
the building
behind me, which commemorates
the foundation
of the Korean army, a fitting
place then for
Kim Jong-un to assert his
control over the
military and his party.
Kim Oak Yoo (ph) is a doctor in
the city and
told us she has pride in a
nation that can
defend itself against any enemy
in the world.
What this Congress will likely
lack in policy-making,
it will make up for in political
showmanship.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Kim has held power for
four years,
succeeding his father and
grandfather.
Major League Baseball has
announced it's moving
two of its scheduled games out
of Puerto Rico
over concerns about the Zika
virus. The games
were scheduled for later in May
between the
Pittsburgh Pirates and Miami
Marlins. Players
and staff of both clubs were
briefed by the
Centers for Disease Control on
the risks associated
with Zika before the decision
was made. The
games will be relocated to
Miami.
And thousands of fans of Prince
are paying
tribute to the late pop star
tonight in Los
Angeles. The public memorial in
front of city
hall includes a free concert
featuring singers
Faith Evans and Eric Benet.
Prince was found
dead last month at his home in a
suburb of
Minneapolis.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
fire destroys
Canada's Fort McMurray, leaving
an apocalyptic
wake; why Puerto Ricans are
leaving the island
in record numbers; my
conversation with Senator
Bernie Sanders, and much more.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Evacuees from an
enormous wildfire
moved to safety today in
Alberta, Canada.
They were ferried out by an
airlift and a
land convoy from a large section
of the province,
the heart of the country's oil
industry.
Hari Sreenivasan reports.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
HARI SREENIVASAN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT:
They rolled down a deserted
highway about
50 vehicles at a time, taking
evacuees south
to safety.
Over the next four days,
thousands will convoy
from north of Fort McMurray,
where they've
been stranded, toward Edmonton.
They're driving
through a fire zone that's
roughly ten times
the size of Manhattan.
Chad Morrison is Alberta's
manager of wildfire
prevention.
CHAD MORRISON, ALBERTA MANAGER
OF WILDFIRE
PREVENTION: No firebreak here
would have stopped
this fire, because this fire is
jumping kilometers
at a time. We're seeing fire
spreads where,
you know, it's creating its own
lightning
fires out of this fire. This is
an extreme,
rare, rare fire event and that's
something
that's historic for us.
SREENIVASAN: The big blaze has
scorched some
1,600 homes and buildings,
burning entire
suburbs, but, Alberta premier
Rachel Notley
says the Fort McMurray city
center has survived,
so far.
RACHEL NOTLEY, ALBERTA PREMIER:
As of this
morning, the downtown is largely
intact. The
hospital is still standing. And
municipal
buildings and the airport also
remain intact.
Firefighters have also been
working to save
as much of the residential areas
as possible.
SREENIVASAN: More than 1,100
firefighters
are on the fire lines, backed by
145 helicopters
and 22 air tankers. But, there's
only so much
they can do.
The fire first broke out Sunday,
and by Tuesday,
towering walls of flames closed
in on the
city, with a blanket of thick
smoke choking
the sky.
Some 88,000 residents fled for
their lives,
many of them to evacuation
centers to the
south.
Evan Dyer of the Canadian
Broadcast Corporation
has been reporting from the
scene.
EVAN DYER, CANADIAN BROADCAST
CORPORATION:
People have talked about
escaping through
100 foot flames on both sides of
the road.
I mean, we have seen dash cam
footage that
we shot of people fleeing this
fire where
you find it hard to believe cars
can even
make it through this inferno.
There was fire
hopping both sides of Highway
63, which is
the only road of out Fort
McMurray.
SREENIVASAN: The city sits in
the heart of
Canada's oil sands region, and
the flames
have shut down a number of
facilities, pushing
up global oil prices.
Meanwhile, the fire is still
burning out of
control, fueled by low humidity
and high winds.
MORRISON: Right now, we really
do need some
rain. There's no question about
it. And then
even once we get rain, there's
still going
to be a lot of fire out there
and a lot of
work. We'll be here for weeks
and weeks to
put that fire out.
SREENIVASAN: The CBC's Evan Dyer
says that
means there's no timetable for
when the evacuees
will finally be able to return
home.
DYER: Some know for a fact that
their homes
have been destroyed. Others are
still living
with the uncertainty of not
knowing, some
know their homes are safe, but
perhaps are
in the path of fire.
SREENIVASAN: But, Melissa Blake,
the mayor
of the regional municipality of
Wood Buffalo,
says they'll make it.
MELISSA BLAKE, MAYOR OF THE
REGIONAL MUNICIPALITY
OF WOOD BUFFALO: We are a strong
and resilient
community. And friends and
families and people
who are worried about our folks,
I need to
assure you, everybody has been
out safe and
sound. We've got more that we're
moving and
we will get them out.
SREENIVASAN: An investigation is
underway
to determine how the fire
started in the first
place.
For the PBS "NewsHour", I Hari
Sreenivasan.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Now, to the escalating
debt crisis
in Puerto Rico. The U.S.
territory has for
some years been in a prolonged
financial descent
and earlier this week, its
government missed
a significant loan payment.
Jeffrey Brown filed our report,
from the island's
capital city.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JEFFREY BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT:
The sights and sounds of old San
Juan leading
back to the 16th century. This
morning, locals
and tourists enjoyed the charm
of the Caribbean
island.
But last night, about an hour
away, we heard
of another Puerto Rico. Coral
Jimenez lives
with her 11-year-old son Felix
who suffers
severe disabilities. Several
months ago, the
fiscal crisis that now plagues
this island
territory trick ltd down to her
son.
CORAL JIMENEZ: The people that
provide therapy
for my son were not getting paid
so we stopped
getting the services for more
than a month.
He couldn't get his physical
therapy, occupational
therapy, speech therapy,
psychological therapy,
he stopped getting them.
BROWN: Coral says caring for her
son has taken
a village of friends and family.
But now,
that village itself needs help.
JIMENEZ: For a son like my
Felix, I required
therapy, I required his father
to help me
economically. My mom has to help
me, but the
economy has been affecting his
father's business.
He's doing the best he can, but
he's warning
me things are not going the way
they used
to be.
Some friends of mine, they used
to helped
me a lot, they have to move to
the States,
so I don't count on those
friends anymore.
BROWN: Around San Juan, we heard
other stories
from victims of a slow-moving
economic crisis
that's battered government
coffers and sacked
personal savings. The
unemployment rate is
here is double that of the
mainland U.S.
UNIDENTIFIED MALE (through
translator): My
kids are grown up now. One is in
university
and I also have grandchildren.
They are suffering,
too, because I can't help them
the way I normally
would have.
BROWN: One response, Puerto
Ricans are leaving
in record numbers, some 230 a
day. According
to a recent study, Puerto Rico
lost testimony
2 percent of its population in
2014 and the
flight continues.
Enrique Cuervas runs a bodega in
San Juan.
ENRIQUE CUERVAS (through
translator): My sister
in law moved to the U.S. she was
struggling
as a nurse in Puerto Rico. Now
she lives in
Florida and she doubled her
salary. They
pay her $29 an hour. She was
making $9 here.
DOMINGO CRUZ, SAN JORGE
CHILDREN HOSPITAL:
Health professionals are leaving
the island.
You see an empty ward right now.
I have to
between frozen positions and
layoffs, I had
about one-fifth, about 100
positions that
I have either frozen or laid off
employees.
BROWN: One hard-hit sector,
health care. Domingo
Cruz, head of San Jorge
Children's Hospital
in San Juan, has had to make
difficult choices
as people slide into poverty,
can't pay their
bills and the government rolls
back its support.
CRUZ: No business can stay open
if you cut
40 percent of your business. If
Congress doesn't
assign resources to the Medicaid
program,
the whole healthcare system on
the island
will collapse.
BROWN: Collapse?
CRUZ: It will collapse.
Eventually, there
will not be enough healthcare
professionals
to take care of the 3.5 million
U.S. citizens
in Puerto Rico.
BROWN: The question of the
moment is whether
Puerto Rico itself can stay in
business. Some
of the problems have gone on for
more than
a decade, but this week came the
latest twist,
as the government will default
on a scheduled
debt payment.
Sergio Marxuach of the Center
for a New Economy,
an independent Puerto
Rican-based think tank,
says Puerto Rico failed time and
again to
adjust to economic realities.
SERGIO MARXUACH, THE CENTER FOR
A NEW ECONOMY:
The two big problems are the
economic slow
down and the debt crisis. Puerto
Rico has
been contracting since 2006,
that's when the
tax break for U.S. companies
doing business
in Puerto Rico expired. Congress
phased it
out starting in 1996 over ten
years.
BROWN: And companies left and
jobs left --
MARXUACH: Companies left and
jobs left and
the government had to increase
the debt to
keep the economy going.
BROWN: Today, that overall debt
stands at
an astounding $72 billion. And
on Monday,
the government said it would not
pay a piece
of it, a $422 million payment
owed by it government
development bank.
ALEJANDRO GARCIA PADILLA, PUERTO
RICO
GOVERNOR: I haven't been able to
afford one
then you have the other.
BROWN: Puerto Rico's Governor
Alejandro Garcia
Padilla says he had to make a
choice between
paying off creditors and
providing basic services.
PADILLA: I do not have the
moneys. It's not
that I do not want to pay. It's
I just don
have the money. It's automatic.
If today I have to pay to supply
fuel to police
cars, I will not pay the
supplier of the medicines
to the medical center.
BROWN: It that -- you have to
pick one
or the other, you feel?
PADILLA: Every day.
BROWN: The governor blames what
he calls vulture
hedge funds blocking Puerto
Rico's request
to restructure its debt and sees
racial discrimination
and ads now airing in the U.S.
AD ANNOUNCER: Stop the
Washington bailout
of Puerto Rico.
PADILLA: Why are they using
actors, trying
to represent that they are
Puerto Ricans?
Why are they say we're asking
for a bailout,
one that not true? It's just
because we
are not a state? It just
because we're
not a republic? It just because
we are
Puerto Rican?
BROWN: The governor wants help
from Washington
and key figures from Treasury
Secretary Jack
Lew to House Speaker Paul Ryan
are looking
for possible solutions including
new legislation
that would allow Puerto Rico to
file for a
kind of municipal bankruptcy, as
Detroit did.
For the moment, though, there's
a political
stalemate. If it lasts, Governor
Garcia Padilla
has warned, a bailout by U.S.
taxpayers is
inevitable.
SOFIA STOLBERGER, PILOTO 151: We
are optimistic
entrepreneurship is the way
forward.
BROWN: But for some, the picture
is much brighter,
filled with opportunity.
Piloto 151 is small business
aiming for a
giant breakthrough. It part
tech incubate
around meet-up place, offering
office space
and training to would be
entrepreneurs.
Sofia Stolberg is the
co-founder.
STOLBERG: When there is economic
pain, there
is economic opportunity. We
truly believe
entrepreneurship and high-growth
entrepreneurship
is what's going to help us out
of this fiscal
crisis we're currently in.
BROWN: How does that do that?
STOLBERG: It will eventually get
to a critical
mass where we'll be able to have
at least
one big home run that we'll be
able to change
the economic landscape forever.
BROWN: It's a lot to hope for
and maybe years
away.
The territory as a whole faces
its next test
when a huge debt payment of $2
billion comes
due on July 1st.
But Coral Jimenez is focused on
daily struggles.
She wants to remain in her
homeland with her
son and is trying to hold out
faith.
CORAL JIMENEZ: I not like some
other people
that think the government is
against us and
the department of education is
against us
and trying to take away our
services. I think
people are trying. People of the
government,
they're trying. But whatever
they're doing
is not working.
It's not fair my son gets
affected. Hundreds
of kids get affected because of
decisions
somebody else is making, and I
don't think
for a second that they're doing
it with a
bad intention, but it's
affecting the population.
BROWN: Affecting this island of
more than
3 million, one family at a time.
From San
Juan, Puerto Rico, I Jeffrey
Brown for
the "PBS NewsHour".
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: And in a second report
next week,
Jeff will look at how the
mosquito-borne Zika
virus threatens Puerto Rico, and
what the
territory is doing to fight
back.
(MUSIC)
WOODRUFF: Stay with us. Coming
up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields and David Brooks
examine this
week with its political turning
point. Pianist
Rob Kapilow breaks down a famous
piece by
Johannes Brahms just in time to
celebrate
the late composer's birthday.
But first, we turn our focus to
the fight
to win the Democratic nomination
for president.
Even as the delegate math favors
Hillary Clinton
to become the party's nominee in
November,
Bernie Sanders is still working
hard to defeat
her. I spoke with the Vermont
senator this
afternoon.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: Senator Sanders,
welcome to the
"NewsHour".
Let me start with a question
about something
that's happened in West
Virginia, a state
you have been campaigning in.
Donald trump,
yesterday, received the
endorsement of the
West Virginia Coal Association.
This is a
group that represents 95 percent
of the coal
industry in that state. They
almost always
endorse Democrats.
What does that say about the
challenge that
you or Secretary Clinton face
this November?
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (I-VT),
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATE: Well, I think that we
stand a good
chance to win the primary in
West Virginia
on Tuesday, and the reason is
that we are
talking to the issues that
impact the people
of West Virginia and, in fact,
this country,
and that is the fact that people
are working
longer hours for lower wages and
almost all
new income and wealth is going
to the top
1 percent. That we're the only
major country
on earth that doesn guarantee
healthcare
to all people and paid family
and medical
leave.
Now in terms of coal in West
Virginia, I think
the scientific community has
made it as clear
as they can, climate change is
real. It is
caused by human activity. It
already doing
devastating harm all over this
planet. And
I think we have got to transform
our energy
system away from fossil fuel.
But I have introduced change
legislation which
puts $41 billion into rebuilding
those communities
all over this country that have
been hurt
by that transition, by making
sure that if
workers lose their jobs, they're
going to
get new jobs. They're going to
get educational
opportunities. They're going to
get extended
unemployment.
WOODRUFF: I hear you. But when
the group that
represents most of the coal
industry hears
your message and Donald Trump's,
they're saying
they like Donald Trump better.
SANDERS: Well, I think at the
end of the day
the people of West Virginia and
the people
of America understand that we
have a moral
responsibility to leave this
planet in a way
that is healthy and habitable
for your children
and future generations.
WOODRUFF: Senator, a question
about what Secretary
Clinton said to "The Los Angeles
Times" this
week in an interview with the
editorial board.
She said, "Anytime you ask
Senator Sanders
a question about foreign
policy," what's your
plan, for example, to defeat
ISIS? She said,
"His response is, I voted
against the Iraq
war authorization," meaning
Secretary Clinton.
She went on to say, "He has
never had any
experience or authority to make
any hard decisions."
She said, "I can't tell you what
he would
have done in the Situation Room
about bin
Laden" or -- she listed other
crises. She
said, "But a lot of what he says
is problematic."
SANDERS: Yes, well, you know,
she may not
know what I would have done with
regard to
bin Laden and, obviously, what I
would have
done is everything we could to
kill or capture
him. But she does run away from
this very
important issue.
Look, she was in the Senate. I
was in the
House in 2002. Iraq is and has
been the most
important foreign policy issue
that this country
has faced in our modern history.
She heard
the same evidence that I did.
She voted for
the war, I voted against the
war.
WOODRUFF: But --
SANDERS: She in a debate we had
a couple of
months ago, she said, Henry
Kissinger thought
I was doing a good job as
secretary of state.
Well, what does that tell the
American people?
Kissinger was the worst, most
destructive
secretary of states this country
has had.
WOODRUFF: But what about --
SANDERS: Secretary Clinton and I
do look at
foreign policy in a very
different way.
WOODRUFF: My question, though,
Senator, is
that she's saying that you don't
have the
experience making these
decisions she does.
SANDERS: Yes, well, that's
right, I did not
have the experience to overthrow
Gadhafi in
Libya and then create a
destabilized area
there that allowed ISIS to come
into.
Look, she was secretary of state
for four
years, there's no argument. That
is a lot
of experience. I have been in
the Senate for
nine years. I was in the House
for 16 years.
I voted against the First Gulf
War which I
think history will conclude was
the right
vote.
I believe that ISIS not only
must be defeated,
they must be destroyed, but they
must be destroyed
by Muslim troops on the ground
with our support
and support of other
superpowers. Not with
a perpetual war engaged in by
the Ameri -- the
United States military.
JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS NEWSHOUR
ANCHOR: Senator,
different subject. You sent a
letter today
to the chairman of the
Democratic National
Committee, Debbie Wasserman
Schultz. You urged
her in your words not to stack
the committees
that will draft the rules at the
convention
and lay out the party platform.
You went on
to say that if committee
assignments aren't
fairly allotted, you said one
result could
be floor fights. And you talked
about being
prepared -- that you are
prepared to mobilize
your delegates to force as many
votes as necessary.
This sounds like a threat?
SANDERS: A threat? No. It's
using the rules
and the process of the
Democratic convention,
nothing threatening about it.
What is the
threat is that Chairwoman
Wasserman Schultz
is creating a process right now
in terms of
the selection of delegates for
the major committees
which are totally stacked.
Look, as of now, we have won 45
percent of
the pledged delegates. That is
the real delegates
that people vote for. I have the
feeling that
in the next nine primaries and
caucuses, we're
going to see that number go up,
hopefully,
actually, to a majority.
So I think that our people
deserve a fair
shake on the important
committees. We have
been fighting for Medicare for
all healthcare
program. We're fighting to end
the grotesque
level of income and wealth
inequality. We're
fighting for free tuition of
public colleges
and universities. People who
support me deserve
fair representation on these
committees.
And what the chairwoman has done
so far is
really absurd. She has stacked
the deck completely
with the more conservative
members of the
Democratic Party when the people
all over
this country are saying, we're
tired of establishment
politics and establishment
economics.
So, all that that letter says is
we think
our people, where we are right
now at 45 percent,
I think that number will go
higher, maybe
to 50 percent, we deserve a fair
shake.
What is wrong with that
proposal?
WOODRUFF: Now, Senator, I wasn't
suggesting
there was anything wrong. I was
saying when
you say the result could be
floor fights,
mobilizing the delegates --
SANDERS: Well --
WOODRUFF: -- it sounds like
youe saying
--
SANDERS: That's part of the
rules. Judy, that
is what the rules are. You have
the right
to have minority reports. You
have the right
to have vigorous discussion on
the issues.
All that that letter says is
treat us fairly.
Don't stack the deck and give us
committees
that are lopsided in terms of
Clinton delegates.
We want a fair shake. Nothing
more than that.
If we don't get a fair shake, we
will do what
is natural. We will use the
rules of the Democratic
convention to fight for what we
believe in.
WOODRUFF: OK. Senator, you've
looked very
closely, of course, at this
context coming
up there, nine more states
coming, I should
say nine more primaries, four
more caucuses
coming up.
What do you believe is the most
number of
pledged delegates you could have
going into
this convention?
WOODRUFF: Look, Judy, we are
fighting an uphill
battle to get a majority. For
us, I think,
for example, we stand a pretty
good chance
to win in West Virginia, maybe
Kentucky and
I think we're favored in Oregon.
I think we
have a good chance to win in
California which
obviously is the largest number
of delegates
of any state.
If we get -- and I understand
this is uphill,
I not predicting that we will,
but if
we do very, very well and get 65
percent of
the remaining votes, we actually
will have
a majority of pledge delegates
as I understand
it. If not, maybe wel have 47
percent,
48 percent of pledged delegates
going into
the convention.
And the case that I want to make
to the superdelegates,
over 400 superdelegates came on
board secretary
Clinton's campaign well over a
year ago before
I even got into the race, and
the case that
I want to make to those parts of
the Democratic
establishment is what is most
important is
we defeat Donald Trump, that
somebody like
Trump never should get into the
White House.
And if you look at all of the
national polls,
virtually all of the statewide
polls, Bernie
Sanders is the stronger
candidate against
Donald Trump than is Hillary
Clinton. And
the reason for that is we are
appealing not
only to Democrats, we are
appealing to independents
as well.
WOODRUFF: Senator, final quick
question -- what
do you say to your supporters
that are telling
my colleagues at the "NewsHour",
other journalists,
that if you don't get the
nomination, they're
going to vote -- theye not
going to vote
for Hillary Clinton and they may
vote for
Donald Trump?
SANDERS: Well, what I will --
what I am going
to be doing now, Judy, in the
next five weeks
is fighting for every delegate
that we can
get. We have a narrow path to
victory, but
I going to fight to see that we
can win,
and then we're going to take our
fight to
the Democratic Caucus.
If we do not one the nomination,
we will sit
down with Secretary Clinton and
wel see
where we go from here.
But it is incumbent on Secretary
Clinton,
who by the way, as I understand
it, is now
reaching out to Jeb Bush's
fundraisers in
order to raise money from them,
you know,
and that really casts a doubt on
the parts
of millions of Americans -- are
you really
going to stand up for the
working and middle
class while you're collecting
millions from
Jeb Bush supporters? I mean,
those are the
kinds of things that I think
make not only
my supporters but ordinary
Americans nervous.
But the bottom line is: A, we're
going to
fight to win the Democratic
nomination. B,
we're going to make sure if we
don't win that
the platform at the convention
is a platform
that speaks to the needs of
working families.
C, if we do not win the
nomination, we're
looking forward to sitting down
with Secretary
Clinton and seeing where we go
from there.
WOODRUFF: Senator Bernie
Sanders, we thank
you very much.
SANDERS: Thank you.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: That interview from
this afternoon.
And we take a close look now at
this stunner
of a week in American politics
with Shields
and Brooks. That is syndicated
columnist Mark
Shields, and "New York Times"
columnist David
Brooks.
Welcome, gentlemen.
So, we just heard from a feisty
Bernie Sanders.
We're going to talk about him in
a minute.
But I first want to ask you
about, I guess,
kind of an earth quake that
happened this
week that many people thought
wouldn't come,
the presumptive nominee of the
Republican
Party, David, is Donald Trump. I
won't say
if anybody in this room
predicted he might
not make this -- reach this
point, but what
does it say that here he is
against all odds?
DAVID BROOKS, THE NEW YORK
TIMES: I'd like
to assure you that he will not
get the nomination.
(LAUGHTER)
BROOKS: You know, it says a lot
of things.
It says the Republican
establishment has been
coasting on the fumes of
Reaganite philosophy
for too long which are not
applicable to the
day. It says that we have some
people in America
who are longing for a country
that is never
coming back, where a certain
sort of white
male ideal is the top of society
and that's
never coming back and they're
looking for
a white male to remind them of
those days.
It also says a lot of people are
hurting for
perfectly legitimate reasons.
They've seen
their jobs go, theye seen their
neighborhoods
go, theye seen their families
go, theye
seen drug addiction, theye seen
unemployment,
and theye pessimistic about the
future
and theye willing to take a
flyer on the
guy.
And so, there are a lot of
legitimate and
illegitimate reasons why this
guy is here.
I don't think he's a legitimate
candidate
or would be a legitimate
president but what
he's done has to be respected to
some degree.
WOODRUFF: What would you add,
Mark? How did
he do this?
MARK SHIELDS, SYNDICATED
COLUMNIST: Judy,
I think we missed the story, in
the sense
that we never examined the
program sees that
the Republican Party has been
organized around,
which is an aggressive foreign
policy, a muscular
defense policy,
interventionists, a commitment
to smaller government, and not
open immigration
but certainly, considerably
welcoming immigration
policy, and tax cuts.
And Donald Trump went right by
this argument.
He basically did. I mean, he
repealed the
Republican interventionist
defense foreign
policy and, you know, emphasized
his own opposition
to the war in Iraq, and echoed
some of the
sentiments that the president
himself has.
I mean, our allies have to do
more, that they
have to contribute more to their
own defense,
and the responsibilities.
But I would say beyond that,
what he did was
he put government -- this is
Henry Olsen,
the conservative scholar's
analysis, I think
it's a good one -- he advocates
a government
that is on the side of the
people who are
hurting, the people David
described. I mean,
he's not going to change Social
Security.
He's going to strengthen Social
He going to make sure Social
Security
is there. He going to make
Medicare there
and at the same time, he's going
to use it
to -- aggressive opposition to
trade policies,
where these people in many cases
as David
mentioned have been the
collateral damage.
The big picture has been good.
There are communities
and families and individuals all
over this
country, and he spoke to them in
a way that
really neither party has and,
you know, I
think that has to be
acknowledged, and just
remarked upon. It's an amazing
achievement
what he's done.
He's transformed the Republican
electorate
nominating the president.
WOODRUFF: Well, David, based on
what Mark
is saying and you touched on
this a minute
ago, I mean, what is the
organizing principle
for the Republican Party or
people who vote
Republican?
BROOKS: Well, I happen to figure
the Republican
Party is in a moment of
cataclysmic darkness.
But it's in a moment of
pre-revolutionary
moment that we'll probably have
a cataclysm
in the fall for the party, and
then therel
be a moment of ferment where all
sorts of
different people begin to speak
-- trying
to speak for the party and we'll
have a scientific
revolution, and then some new
party will have
emerged in five years. But I
suspect it won't
be Donald Trump because there is
no there
there, there no policy there.
There is
Trump the personality but when
he goes away,
that's gone.
What interests me about what he
presents to
the party that could last is a
weird mixture
of pessimism -- build a wall,
pull in American
roles abroad and optimism.
When you talk to the Trump
supporters, they
like the optimism, "Make America
Great Again",
you can't believe how great
we're going to
be. And so, there's this weird
mixture of
fear and hope that he embodies
as a person.
The other thing I thinking
about is the
next six months. We've seen in
the last week
or last day in training fire on
Lindsey Graham
and on Jeb Bush. He has great
ability to train
fire on people. That's going to
be focused
on Hillary Clinton for six
months.
What is that going to do to our
politics?
What is that going to do with
the way she
reacts? What is that going to do
to the American
psyche to have probably a level
of personal
viciousness that we actually
haven't seen
before because he does erase all
the rules?
That's going to have some
permanent effect
on the divisions within this
country and probably
at least in the short term not
for the better.
WOODRUFF: What about that, Mark?
Does it make
any difference that the leading
lights in
the Republican Party are either
clearly not
with him, the two former
Republican -- living
Republican presidents, both
Presidents Bush,
Mitt Romney, John McCain are not
going to
the convention, they're not
getting involved.
Does that matter?
SHIELDS: Yes, it speaks volumes.
I mean, these
are privileged observers who
know the man.
It's unthinkable that George W.
Bush, the
most recent Republican president
could support
him.
I mean, this is a man, Donald
Trump, who on
the eve of the South Carolina
primary, in
the debate, accused George W.
Bush not being
simply being -- having been
negligent in the
invasion of Iraq, or not having
thought it
through, but of deliberately and
consciously
knowing there were no weapons of
mass destruction
and sending Americans into
combat and into
death.
I mean, that is such a charge of
such magnitude
and such seriousness, there no
way you
could even, you know, stand in
the same room
with such a person which George
W. Bush understandably
does not want to do.
But to David's point, what
you're going to
get I think from Trump is almost
-- it's the
reality TV, sort of the wives of
Jersey Shore,
no thought goes, no matter how
shallow, goes
unexpressed. I mean, Lindsey
Graham said he
couldn't vote for him today.
Fine, let it
go. But he has to respond in
kind.
This is a man who's going to
need, in our
current political climate, 90
percent-plus
of Republicans to have any kind
of a chance
to be competitive, and he
doesn't have them
now, and, you know, I just don't
think if
you're going to continue sniping
and griping
and just denigrate and demean
other Republicans
that you're ever going to get
him.
WOODRUFF: Do you think there
will be a third-party
move on the part of
conservatives, David?
What --
BROOKS: No, there is not enough
self-confidence
to do that. There is not enough
organizational
structure. Right now, the
Republicans who
were non-Trump are deeply
unhappy, deeply
immobilized. Morale is low,
conviction is
low.
So, I don think theye going to
do
anything. Theye just going to
sit and
avoid and hope to survive.
WOODRUFF: But there are tough
decisions that
Republicans will be making in
the weeks --
SHIELDS: It's especially tough,
Judy, if you're
a Republican running for
Congress. I mean,
you know, we now have
nationalized our elections
to the point where people vote
the same way
for president they vote for
Congress, and
there is very little overlap.
And if Donald
Trump is going to be in trouble
in your district,
you know, that's a problem for
Republicans.
WOODRUFF: So, let's talk about
the Democrats,
David. We just heard from Bernie
Sanders.
He didn't show any signs of
slowing down.
He's going to fight to the last
dog dies,
I guess, as somebody would put
it.
What do we have happening here
in the Democratic
race for president?
BROOKS: Well, Hillary Clinton's
pretty weak.
I mean, the loss -- I confess I
was surprised
by her loss in Indiana. Usually,
once it sort
of gets settled, the party
coalesces, but
that doesn happen. That is not
happening,
in part because he has his
issues, he has
his following, in part because
she just hasn't
been able to rally and inspire.
And her base,
her supporters, it's almost
demographically
defined, not intellectually or
emotionally
defined.
And I -- you know, she gave a
speech in West
Virginia this week which in some
levels was
a fine speech but it sounded
like every other
political speech you've heard,
and the political
proposals in there were fine,
you know, expand
community college, let's look at
job training
programs, they were fine. But
they did not
inspire an interest, they did
not seem new,
they did not seem fresh, and
this is a year
where freshness is really called
for because
of the mood of the country.
And, so, I think imaginatively,
she has not
risen to the moment and still
has not risen
to this moment. She's now
training fire on
Trump and that will probably be
enough. But
in terms of inspiring people for
an agenda
when and if she becomes
president is not really
there yet in my mind.
WOODRUFF: What do you see
happening?
SHIELDS: Well, I disagree in the
sense that
what have been her liabilities
in the primaries,
and they -- and Bernie Sanders
has a remarkable
story. I mean, he got 18
primary and caucus
victories when people had
written him off
before.
WOODRUFF: And he going to win
more --
(CROSSTALK)
SHIELDS: He going to win West
Virginia
and Oregon, according to poll
information.
And so, you know, 20 heading
into California.
It's pretty -- it remarkably
impressive,
2.4 million contributors and all
the rest
of it. But I think in a strange
way, what
have been Hillary Clinton's
liabilities, the
lack of incitement, the long
resume, the sort
of stability and predictability
could become
great assets in a general
election, running
against this mercurial,
flamboyant figure.
I mean, she going to -- it's
going to
look like, wow, that's bedrock I
think to
a lot of American voters. Even
ones right
now who don't like her, don't
intend to vote
for her, she is going to look
like the beacon,
the island in a contest if it is
a Trump-Clinton
race, and I think it is a
strength of hers,
her stability and predictability
and sort
of solid commitment to policy
and facts and
background.
I think that -- I think that in
a strange
way what has been a liability
could be a great
asset.
WOODRUFF: Could that work to her
benefit?
I mean, she still has to deal
with Sanders.
BROOKS: Right. No, I agree with
Mark. Generally,
voters vote for the candidate of
order, the
one who seems safest, and she
certainly
compared to, you know, Mr.
Thermonuclear,
Self-Implosion, Donald Trump,
yes, she does
seem safe.
But I still think even -- so
she's likely
to win, obviously. But as a
president, being
the status quo, being sitting on
the course
is probably still not what the
country wants.
And, so, I do think, if I were
her, I would
think where can I be more daring
than I have
been, and who can I hire that's
more daring
than I have been?
Where -- because Trump has --
Sanders has
big ideas, Trump has ideas that
are big but
hollow, but all of the sensible
people have
really small ideas. And I think
she's included
in that, and, frankly, Paul Ryan
is, too,
right now. I think a lot of his
instincts
are right. But the idea is
people have been
constrained by the last 20 years
of what we
can think about. And so, the
ideas coming
out of people that are
respectable are just
not big and daring.
WOODRUFF: Speaker Ryan has said
he won
-- at this point, he's not ready
to support
Trump.
SHIELDS: No, but I mean, you
know, Bernie
has got a big idea, free tuition
at colleges.
That's an idea sponsored by
another Vermont
member of congress, Justin
Morrill, in 1862,
in the middle of the Civil War.
And we built
the University of California,
one of the great
university systems and that's
produced 81
Nobel Prize winners.
So, you know, we're a time of
small, timid
ideas and have been. I mean,
Barack Obama
had big ideas in 2009 and 2010,
and the voters
spoke rather resoundingly in
2010, and he
has not had anywhere near a
working majority
in the Congress since.
WOODRUFF: Well, I covered 2010.
I didn't cover
the Vermont politician in the
1800s.
SHIELDS: No, that was free
tuition. That was
Abraham Lincoln signing. Those
were two Republicans.
Those were big ideas. You know,
the gross
domestic product was then? Seven
billion dollars
and we did it. Isn't that
remarkable? And
we can't do it now?
WOODRUFF: Wee remarkable still.
BROOKS: How does he know all
this?
(LAUGHTER)
WOODRUFF: He was there!
SHIELDS: I was.
WOODRUFF: David Brooks, Mark
Shields, thank
you.
(BREAK)
WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
pianist and composer
Rob Kapilow returns, this time
to discuss
19th century German pianist and
composer Johannes
Brahms, who would have
celebrated a birthday
tomorrow. First, here is noted
pianist Emanuel
Ax playing "Brahms Intermezzo in
A Major,
Op. 118, No. 2."
(VIDEO CLIP PLAYS)
WOODRUFF: At the signature
theater in Arlington,
Virginia, Rob Kapilow talked
with Jeffrey
Brown about what makes Brahms'
music so beautiful
and endearing.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JEFFREY BROWN, PBS NEWSHOUR
CORRESPONDENT:
Rob Kapilow, welcome back.
ROB KAPILOW, PIANIST: Thanks so
much for having
me.
BROWN: Johannes Brahms, a man
and his music,
right? You picked one of his
famous piano
pieces.
KAPILOW: I did. But you know,
the thing is,
to get at the heart of Brahms'
music is difficult
because to get at the heart of
who Brahms
was as a person is difficult.
BROWN: Brahms the man.
KAPILOW: Brahms the man. I mean,
according
to all contemporary accounts, he
was sarcastic,
prickly, abrupt, utterly
self-guarded, almost
impossible to get to know. And
the same thing
is actually true of this piece.
This is the
second piece in a set of six
pieces, but the
first piece is, like Brahms
himself, dense,
filled with swirling energy,
complicated,
dark, and he has to sort of
wrestle it into
submission to actually end the
piece like
this -- and then one long chord.
BROWN: That's the end of part
one.
KAPILOW: End of part one. But in
a way it's
also the beginning of part two,
because that
last chord is actually the first
chord of
our song. But it's not just a
shared chord,
it's as if somehow Brahms had to
work through
the complexity, turbulence and
struggle of
this first piece, in order to
sing from the
heart in the second.
There's this fantastic quote
that he himself
acknowledges. He says, "Have I
not often told
you how seldom I succeed in
getting my thoughts
out of my heart and onto paper.
It is exactly
the same with my composing. It
simply won't
flow from my heart."
BROWN: This is to Clara
Schumann.
KAPILOW: This is to Clara
Schumann, the closest
person in his life, but though
he may have
felt that the music wouldn't
flow from his
heart, when you hear the first
phrase of this
second piece, nothing could
sound more straight
from the heart than this
exquisite music.
(PLAYING PIANO)
BROWN: So what's going on there?
KAPILOW: The thing that's so
amazing is, when
you just hear it, it sounds like
simple, spontaneous
melody, straight from the heart.
But --
BROWN: The passion, the emotion.
KAPILOW: All there. Even his
most lyrical
melodies tend to be almost
mathematically
constructed out of these tiny,
microscopic,
developable ideas. This one is
based on two
tiny, anti-romantic ideas. What
Il call
"1, 2, up" -- it's important for
you to learn
these technical vocabulary-- "1,
2, up" and
then same two notes, last one
changed, "1,
2, leap."
So, just "1, 2, up" and then "1,
Now, you won't know it until the
last incredible
measure of this song, but "1, 2,
up" really
wants to resolve to "1, 2,
down." But the
first time he puts that note up
an octave,
so instead of "1, 2, down" and
resolution,
we get yearning.
There's this leap in the right
hand that really
exaggerates it, "1, 2, up," all
Brahms' yearning
is in that one thing.
BROWN: Maybe to Clara, right?
KAPILOW: The desire for intimate
communication,
wanting to say more, but then
all filtered
through this supremely
accomplished, almost
mathematically precise
technique.
I mean, take the climax of this
piece. It
sounds utterly heartfelt.
Everything he always
wanted to say to Clara right
here. Then he
marks, "singing, singing." but
though it sounds
straight from the heart, it's
constructed
with mathematical precision. So
we come back
to "1 2 up" at the very end of
the piece,
down here in the middle now. "1,
2 up." every
other time it's gone "1 2 leap,"
but it wants
to go "1 2 down." and we get
both at the same
time in one rolled chord.
We get "1, 2," first we get
down, and then
we get leap. And you have heart
and mind perfectly
combined, emotion and technique.
We resolve
and we yearn at the same time.
BROWN: Johannes Brahms, through
Rob Kapilow.
Thank you.
KAPILOW: Thank you.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online, right
now, you may want to take
another look in
your freezer. The Centers for
Disease Control
has warned that frozen
vegetables and fruits
may be the cause of a listeria
outbreak, prompting
a recall of 350 products sold
under 42 different
brands. You can find four things
you should
know about the bacteria, on our
web site,
that PBS.org/newshour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues. Later
tonight on
"Washington Week" with Gwen
Ifill: will some
Republicans rally behind Hillary
Clinton?
And can Donald Trump win over
Democratic voters?
Answers and analysis tonight on
"Washington
Week."
On tomorrow's edition of PBS
"NewsHour Weekend,"
Operation Peacemaker, a program
in Richmond,
California, that pays at-risk
young men to
stay out of trouble.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DEVONE BOGGAN: Try to imagine
growing up in
a war zone.
REPORTER: Richmond police
believed that most
of the shootings could be blamed
on just a
couple dozen young men.
When you pay them this stipend,
are you just,
in a sense, rewarding bad
behavior?
BOGGAN: Every bit of the stipend
that they
receive is tied to an
accomplishment. Now,
if the question is, "why should
these young
men get that?"
REPORTER: Why should they? I
mean, there's
a lot of guys out there who
haven't committed
crimes.
BOGGAN: Because they need it
more than that
guy.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
WOODRUFF: That's tomorrow night
on PBS "NewsHour"
weekend.
And we'll be back, right here,
on Monday.
Come along as we follow the
trail of our electronic
waste. Discover how your old
computer and
printer, that you dropped off to
be recycled,
may not end up where it's
supposed to.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I Judy
Woodruff. Have a great weekend.
Thank you,
and good night.